
The BIDAF data analysis toolkit

This package illustrates the data analysis tools developed in the
BIDAF project (A Big Data Analytics Framework), funded by KKS and
running between 2015 - 2020, with participants RISE, Halmstad
University, and University of Skövde.

The developed statistical machine learning methods for discovering and
visualizing unsupervised structure in data, which could potentially be
large and streaming. The type of structures discovered are: Clusters,
Anomalies, Causal relations, and Higher order similarity relations.

This package is a simple demo version. It has several
shortcomings. For example, it is rather picky about the data format,
can only handle numerical values (not symbolic/strings), and there
must be no missing features. Many of the analysis methods are also
quite slow, since they are implemented directly in python, which means
that the data for this version should preferrably not be so big after
all - more than 10000 samples or some tens of attributes will be
painfully slow. Future versions of the package may be enhanced.


  How to start it

To run it you need python-3.0 with its standard packages installed
(like matplotlib, tkinter, sklearn, and pandas)

It is expecting the data to be in csv format (Comma Separated Values,
but the separator can actually be comma, semicolon, or tab) with
samples row-wise and different features column-wise. The analysed data
should be numerical, and not have any missing values. The data may
come in time series, in which case there should be a time stamp
column. It may also come from separate "entities", which should then
have their identities in some column (and which may represented as
strings).

You can run it in two modes, batch or streaming. In batch mode
training of the models are performed on the whole data set first,
before showing anything, and depending on the size of the data it may
take some time (several hours for large data files). In streaming
mode, data are fed incrementally to the models, and shown as it
arrives. The models are updated regularly. On a large dataset you will
be able to see something immediately, but it will take even longer
time to get through all the data, since the display is continuously
updated and the models retrained several times.

To start it in batch mode, write on the command line:
  python3 bidaf

To start it in streaming mode, write:
  python3 bidaf_stream

First a window pops up where you can select the data file and give
some parameters. If the fields in the file are not separated by
commas, you may tick either semicolon or tab in the first row. Then
select the file browser to pick the data file. The first row in the
file is supposed to contain the column names. They will be shown in
the feature list further down. Here some columns can be deselected if
they should be ignored (for example because they are constant or not
numerical or contain unknown values). If the data comes from several
entities that should be considered separately, a column with entity
identities may be selected in a drop down meny. If the data comes in
time series, a column with a time stamp may be selected in another
drop down meny.

Now, if a time stamp columns is selected, a scale and stride length
should be provided. This is to handle for example irregularly sampled,
slow moving, or noisy time series, so that they are smoothed (using a
Gaussian filter with the scale as standard deviation) and resampled at
regular intervals (given by the stride). (Note that it is not
meaningful to have a stride shorter than the scale, because then the
data will hardly change between samples) It can also be used to study
the data at different time scales by varying this parameter. It is
here also possible to expand the smoothed features with the local
slope and variance.

Then press start. In batch mode it will start analysis, and then open
the main window to show the data and the analysis results. In
streaming mode it will first open the main window, and then gradually
show and analyse data as it arrives.


  What is shown in the main window

The main window is divided in several compartments. In the top left are
the data file name and the number of data samples (read so far, if in
streaming mode).

If there are any entities in the data, they are shown as squares below
the file name. Under the entities is a dependency graph between the
features, shown as circles with lines between. To the upper left are
a number of time series plot, and below them a scatter plot.

The axes of the scatter plot are initially the two largest PCA
axes. Which features to show on the axes can be selected by clicking
on the feature circles in the dependency graph to the left. The last
two clicked features will be shown on the axes. Clicking a link shows
the two features it connects. Clocking outside of the nodes and links
(but still in the graph area) restores the scatter plot to show the
two largest PCA axes. If there are entities, clicking on an entity
square will show the data related to this entity. (Non-selected data
is still shown but in the background as light gray.) By shift-clicking
the entity squares it is possible to selecte several entities to show
at once. When no entity is selected, all data is shown.

The time series plot area will initially only show a time series of
anomaly scores. By clicking on features or links in the graph, time
series plots for those features are shown. Up to three feature time
series can be shown at once. If there are several entities, each
entity has its own curve in each plot. Again, by selecting entities by
clicking in the entity squares, only the corresponding curves will be
shown. The time series can be zoomed in or out by the scroll-wheel on
the mouse, and panned sideways by dragging. If there is no timestamp
in the data, the x-axis of the time series plots will correspond to
the index of each data sample instead of the time.

The colors in the scatter plot and time series plot, as well as on the
entity squares, do *not* correspond to the different entities as might
be expected. Instead they correspond to cluster indices detected by
the clustering algorithm. (The color of the entity squares correspond
to the cluster index of the last seen data point of that entity.) The
clustering model is a Gaussian mixture model, which tries to adjust to
the number of clusters by incrementally splitting clusters that are
not sufficiently homogeneous (i.e which can be with sufficient
significance shown not to originate from a single Gaussian). There is
in this version no way to remove superfluous clusters. Outlines
indicating one standard deviation out from the centers of the Gaussian
components are shown as black ellipses in the scatter plot.

There is also an anomaly detection algorithm included. In this version
of the package it is based on the Gaussian mixture model, by
indicating samples that are too far from all mixture components as
anomalous. Such "outlier" points do not belong to any cluster, but are
instead colored in a scale from dark gray to black depending on the
anomaly score (blacker means higher score, i.e farther away). The
anomaly score is also shown in the lowest time series plot.

The dependency graph on the left side of the window also require some
explanation. The circles representing the different features are
initially completely randomly placed. With the mouse they can be
dragged to better positions, to easier see how they are related. the
colors of the links mean quite different things than in the other
plots. First, one can distinguish between indirect correlation and
direct correlation. An indirect correlation means that the features
have a statistical correlation, but which can be explained as the
effect of a sequence of direct correlations. That is, if C dependes on
B and B depends on A, there may appear a statistical correlation
between A and C although they are not directly affecting each
other. Indirect correlations are shown as gray links. The intensity
indicates the strength, as do the small (black) number next to the
link. In contrast, blue links (also with intensity and number
indicating the strength) represent direct correlations, i.e
correlations that can not be explained by indirect effects via other
features in the data. (As always, there may be features not present in
the data which mediates an effect between two seemingly directly
correlated features.) In this version of the program, all correlations
are Pearson correlation coefficients, which only measure the linear
part of the correlation between features. Specifically it does not
consider any of the detected clusters in the data, but the correlation
is calculated as if data comes from a single multivariate Gaussian.

The "skeleton" of direct blue links as opposed to the indirect grey
links, may in itself be a useful structure. However, on top of this is
an algorithm which tries to detect the causal direction of some of the
links. In general it may not be possible to unambiguosly detect the
causal direction of all links just from analysing the data, but for
some links there may be hints that can be used. The current algorithm
is an instantiation of th PC algorithm for causal discovery, which may
detect two converging causal links by testing for causal independence
between the two causing ends of the links. When the causal direction
can be derived for a link in this way, the link is shown in purple,
with an arrow pointing in the causal direction (from cause to
effect). The purple number next to the link is the causal strength of
the link, i.e how much the affected end will be affected if the
causing end changes.

Finally there is an algorithm for detecting higher order similarity
relations. Such relations are shown as green links. A higher order
relation means that although the features are not strongly correlated
to each other, they have a similar pattern of correlations to all
other features. One example is if there are two features that are not
at all correlated with each other, but the affect the other features
in a similar way. This may indicate that the features have similar
"roles" or similar "meanings". This kind of structure is highly useful
in analysing e.g the relations between words or concepts, but it is
somewhat experimental to use for numerical data, so the usefulness in
this context remains to be explored.


  Enjoy!

